---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: The Blog
author: isotopp
author_login: kris
author_email: kristian.koehntopp@gmail.com
wordpress_id: 78
wordpress_url: http://blog.koehntopp.info/?p=78
date: '2017-01-25 09:47:55 +0100'
date_gmt: '2017-01-25 08:47:55 +0100'
categories:
- Blog
tags: []
---
<p> **Tech Meta:** As you can see, this blog is still being built.<br />
- I seem to have fixed the most glaring problems with the stylesheet - blockquotes and links in the text are no longer in an outsized font.<br />
- Basic wordpress hardening is in place. A longer article about that needs to be written.<br />
  - Command line tools for WP are in place, and the installation of the blog has been ansibilized. In a completely horrible way, because uploading a shell script that runs WP-CLI is not the Ansible Way™ at all. This needs to be prettyfied as much as possible, but still won't be the Ansible Way™ when finished.<br />
- I have been testing the blog with mobile, and the theme seems to be adaptive just fine.<br />
**What's missing:** A number of things are not here, yet.<br />
- Let's Encrypt Integration is still not in place. It will come.<br />
- I am still looking for a nice tool that can accept an Android Share intent and will fetch a header and a nice image from the URL and make an article of the "link" format with a number of Categories from it.<br />
  - There is a WP Android App. I need to test it, and also need to understand if it fundamentally can work with Google Authenticator enabled on the blog.<br />
  - If it does not solve the "here's a link, make a basic article share out of it" problem, it's not really helpful. It's not that I'll be writing a lot of text on a cellphone, that would be dump. I need to be able to do G+ like sharing from a cellphone as a reminder to edit and fatten the share later from a proper machine.<br />
**What will happen (several times):** When everything is finished, I need to destroy this VM and redo it from scratch and backup in order to make sure it's completely hands off. We will have a short service interruption for that, but you should not be worried, we'll be back. I still have no timeline for that. **So what will happen? Some&nbsp;Guidelines:** As the new G+ is as horrible as the preview promised, I'll pull my presence out of social media as much as possible.<br />
- We have a RSS content full feed and a RSS comments full feed, on autodiscovery. Subscribe to them.<br />
  - RSS [Content](http://blog.koehntopp.info/index.php/feed/)<br />
  - RSS [Comments](http://blog.koehntopp.info/index.php/comments/feed/)<br />
- All links will go to G+, manually. Or not, if I forget to do that. Use RSS, really.<br />
  - Comments on G+ are off. Use the comments in the blog.<br />
  - The awesome [Friends+me](https://friendsplus.me/) will pick that up and spam the rest of the social media. Comments can't be off there, but I won't be reading them. Sorry about that. Use the comments in the blog.<br />
  - Comments are moderated for first time posters. Once you have commented here and have been enabled, you should be able to do so without moderation.<br />
 Yes, it's retro. That's probably a feature.</p>
