---
author: isotopp
title: "Practice"
date: "2024-06-22T05:06:07Z"
feature-img: assets/img/background/rijksmuseum.jpg
toc: true
tags:
- lang_en
- erklaerbaer
- work
- computer
---

Some things come to me very slowly and painfully.
In this particular case, it’s because I’ve been immersed in an environment where a certain type of activity,
*Practice Building*, was done implicitly by everyone around me.
The environment itself facilitated this implicitly as well.

When I entered a new environment where this practice was not performed and the means to facilitate it were not present,
it became really hard to communicate what was missing.

# The Technology Radar

In an old work environment, some manage was tasked with or had the idea to implement a "Technology Radar".

A 
"[Technology Radar](https://www.thoughtworks.com/insights/blog/technology-strategy/how-to-create-your-enterprise-technology-radar)" 
is a process where companies organize "things they use" in arbitrary quadrants 
that make sense to them.
For IT, "techniques", "tools", "platforms" and "languages and frameworks" seem to be a popular,
but somewhat useless ontology for hierarchical searching.
On the other hand it produces nicer graphics than a "Dewey Decial System for Tech" graphed out,
even if the latter would be systematically more useful to build structure and visualize relationships and alternatives.

To create a "radar-like" appearance, the "things we use" are then assigned one of four statuses,
from the inside out: "adopt", "trial", "assess", and "hold".
What these mean is usually not well understood and contested.
Actually, 75% of the time in the panel discussions for a Tech Radar is wasted,
because people don't understand what these statuses are supposed to mean,
and what the consequence of assigning a status to a tech means.

The statuses could be "test this and tell us", "immature, but shiny", "tried and tested",
"actually no, but some of us need it", and "fuck no".
But that is not what we got, hence the discussions.

It matters not.
You could repair the Tech Radar, but it would still not be the thing that is needed,
but a weak simulation of what is actually required.

Because the other thing that comes to light as part of the technology radar is that people want more:
To understand how a certain technology fits into the company they do not only need a recommendation,
they also need context, recommendations and best practices, and ultimately
[an engineering guide]({{< relref "/2022-04-15-sql-engineering-guidelines.md" >}}).

The question is, what process builds such context, recommendations and **practices**,
and what is needed as a precondition for such a process.

# A catalog of skills and expertise

Another thing that happens in almost any company is
that somebody comes up with the brilliant idea of asking people about the things they are good at,
and to assess themselves at these things.
You know, like a LinkedIn Résumé or skill catalog.

And then you end up with a database of expertise that not only is incomplete for each individual,
but that is also never updated, and ultimately useless because people do not use it.
They do not trust it.
And they are right.

Expertise is not catalogued and not stored in a database.
It is demonstrated.
Because that is what builds trust.
Somebody demonstrating to all who care that they actually are right more often than others.
Or even better, when they are wrong, it is less painful than when others are wrong.
These are not the same thing, and in reality, the latter is more important than the former in most cases.

So how do you demonstrate expertise publicly?
And what does this have to do with a process that builds practices and documents them?

# Practice

Good companies have places.

A place is a communications platform where people can talk to each other with two important properties:

- It is findable with keywords or through an ontology.
- People can join it without being invited.

If it private, unfindable and you need to be invited, you have groups. 
Groups suck, they isolate.
You want Places.

I have written about 
[important properties of chats]({{< relref "/2022-10-12-groups-and-places.md" >}})
elsewhere at length.

If you have places, people will make the places they need,
and then self-organize there to talk about the things they do and how they are doing this.
At least if you give them the time to do this and if you ensure
[pychological safety](https://hbr.org/2023/02/what-is-psychological-safety).
That is, if you allow them to talk in this place in a way that allows face-saving and comfortable learning experiences,
compromise finding and civilized disagreement. 

Places then also become locations where people give (tech-)support as a public performance.
This is important for many reasons:

- People realize that things they take as a given are actually a valid bug.
- It's down for everyone, not just for me.
- These people have the problem I have solved, and I can tell them how.
- Other people see our discussion, and while our solution is valid, it is not actually the taught best practice.
- These guys are using our tool, but for a purpose we haven't anticipated.

All of these things are visible only with support as a public performance.
If you pull these things into Jira tickets, none of this would happen and the company would be left poorer.
I have written about
[support as a public performance]({{< relref "/2024-04-17-support-as-a-public-performance.md" >}})
elsewhere at length.

Of course, chat is not a good medium for support.

If you do support in a chat, you would want a chat with good threads, and encourage people to open a thread per problem.

You would also need a bot that can turn a thread into a Jira ticket,
either after the fact in order to get tracing data out of the threads,
or if it turns out that the support case results in a work item that cannot be resolved immediately.

You also want somebody whose job is technical
and whose job grade enables them to lift the gaze from the path to the horizon to go over the chat.
They would start interventions when they see questions that are unanswered or answered "wrongly".
And with "wrong" I mostly mean cases,
where it is obvious to them that the answer is either not efficient or not applicable to their problem.  

That person would also choose support cases of the week, and by Friday morning produce a writeup.
It may be a blog article or a "medium.com" style writeup about anything that happened, and that is interesting.
If by Friday noon it is online, all the people that spend Friday afternoon on their self-education
will read it, and possibly comment.
Using the articles and the comments, that person can then take the output of all that discussion and
update the
[engineering guide]({{< relref "/2022-04-15-sql-engineering-guidelines.md" >}}).

And the Engineering Guide is the deliverable that picks up where the Technology Radar drops off,
telling people not only what a product is good for, but also how to use it efficiently and
what specific local practices our tribe has developed in order to make it a supportable use-case.

So look at your company:
How does your organization build practice?
How do practitioners meet?

# See also

- [Pizza, People, Projects and Processes (2018)]({{< relref "/2020-06-15-pizza-people-projects-and-processes.md" >}})
- [Example: SQL Engineering Guidelines]({{< relref "/2022-04-15-sql-engineering-guidelines.md" >}})
- [Properties of Chat Systems: Groups and Places]({{< relref "/2022-10-12-groups-and-places.md" >}})
- [Support as a public performance]({{< relref "/2024-04-17-support-as-a-public-performance.md" >}})
