---
author: isotopp
title: "pysembr"
date: "2025-12-20T05:06:07Z"
feature-img: assets/img/background/rijksmuseum.jpg
toc: true
tags:
- lang_en
- computer
- development
- python
---

With the 2025.3 release, JetBrains retired the Gracie Pro Plugin, a tool that until recently provided,
among other features, the option to apply structural wrapping to a file.
For natural languages
this feature automatically applied formatting rules similar to [SemBr](https://www.sembr.org).
SemBr helps writers by inserting line breaks at semantic boundaries rather than simply at arbitrary character counts,
which keeps prose easier to edit and track changes in version control systems.
SemBr is especially useful for Markdown content such as blog posts
where readable plain text and consistent formatting are both important.

Losing the Gracie Pro Plugin’s functionality left a gap in my workflow.
I needed a tool that can format the Markdown in blog articles in something that is roughly like SemBr.
So I had to write my own: [pysembr]( https://github.com/isotopp/pysembr.git),
a Python-based tool applies structural wrapping to natural language text.
Using `uv` it is easy to install and use.

# What pysembr Does

`pysembr` reads your plain text or Markdown files and adds line breaks at the end of each sentence.
Editing such a file later will produce clear diffs, because git looks at line structures.

If a sentence is too long for a line, `pysembr` will try to break at ",".
If that still isn't sufficient, it will look at language specific break words, and optionally at conjunctions.

So we offer:
- "Semantic" line wrapping for natural language text.
- Markdown-aware processing that respects lists, headings, and other structural elements.
- Command-line interface for easy integration into scripts and build pipelines.
- Lightweight and Python-native, making it easy to adapt or extend for custom use.

# How to Use It

1. Have `uv` installed.
2. Clone the repository: `git clone https://github.com/isotopp/pysembr.git`
3. Load the dependencies: `uv sync`
4. Run it with `uv`: `uv run pysembr --help` or install it as a tool: `uv tool install .`

If you run it as a tool, add `uv tool dir --bin` to the PATH in your shell:

For example: 

```bash
pysembr input.md -o output.md
```

This command reads `input.md`, applies semantic line wrapping, and writes the formatted output to `output.md`.
More usage examples can be found in the `README.md`.
